---
layout: post
title: "R31JP Development on Mac and Linux for 6.115"
slug: r31jp_run
date: 2013-07-27
categories: blog
tags: 6.115
---

On my first day in MIT's 6.115 (Microcomputer Project Lab), I was disappointed to see that developing for the R31JP requires using the Windows machines in the lab. The process for uploading code on a lab machine is to first assemble it with the `as31` command line tool and save the resulting hex file, then open the serial monitor and choose the hex file. You also need a USB stick to keep your code when you are done for the day. What I really wanted was to develop from my laptop and make uploading a one step process, so that the time between making a change and testing it is less than 5 seconds rather than at least 30. One of the TA's created an upload script when he took the class, available [here](https://github.com/igutekunst/6.115-Toolchain), but I wanted a single script to assemble and upload code with no additional dependencies, so that uploading to the R31JP is a one-liner.

[View the GitHub project here](https://github.com/nitsky/r31jp_run)

Here are the steps to get setup:

1. Buy a USB-Serial adapter. Here's the one most people in 6.115 in Spring 2013 used:

    [USB-Serial Adapter on Amazon](http://www.amazon.com/TRENDnet-RS-232-Serial-Converter-TU-S9/dp/B0007T27H8/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1372904367&sr=8-1&keywords=usb+serial)

2. Install drivers:

    [Download from Prolific](http://prolificusa.com/pl-2303hx-drivers/)

3. Setup the upload script:

{% highlight python %}
git clone git@github.com:nitsky/r31jp_run.git
cd r31jp_run
make
./r31jp_run -s path/to/serial/port path/to/code.asm
{% endhighlight %}

When you run `make` you will probably see some spurious build errors from `as31`. You can ignore them, the binary still compiles correctly.

The `r31jp_run` script takes one argument, the path to an 8051 assembly file, and has two options, `-s` to specify the serial port for the R31JP, and `-b` to choose the baud rate of MINMON. The default serial port is `/dev/tty.usbserial` which the Prolific driver choose for Mac OS X, and the default baud rate is 9600. The script assembles the code with `as31` and then waits for you to reset the R31JP in MON mode. It then uploads the code, which you can run by switching the board into RUN mode and hitting reset, or by

You can install `r31jp_run` in any way you like, just make sure that the compiled `as31` binary and `r31jp_run` script are on your `$PATH`, and that pyserial is installed, which can be done following the instructions [here](http://pyserial.sourceforge.net/pyserial.html).

Please file an issue on GitHub if you run into any trouble!
