---
layout: post
title: "R31JP Development on Mac and Linux for 6.115"
slug: r31jp
date: 2013-07-27
category: blog
tags: 6.115
---

On my first day in MIT's 6.115 (Microcomputer Project Lab), I was disappointed to see that developing for the R31JP requires using the Windows machines in the lab. The process for uploading code on a lab machine is to first assemble it with the `as31` command line tool and save the resulting hex file, then open the serial monitor and choose the hex file. You also need a USB stick to keep your code when you are done for the day. What I really wanted was to develop from my laptop and make uploading a one step process, so that the time between making a change and testing it is less than 5 seconds rather than at least 30. One of the TA's created an upload script when he took the class, available [here](https://github.com/igutekunst/6.115-Toolchain), but I wanted a single script to assemble and upload code with no additional dependencies, so that uploading to the R31JP is a one-liner.

<!-- more -->

[View the GitHub project here](https://github.com/nitsky/r31jp_run)

Here are the steps to get setup:

1. Buy a USB-Serial adapter. Here's the one most people in 6.115 in Spring 2013 used:

    [USB-Serial Adapter on Amazon](http://www.amazon.com/TRENDnet-RS-232-Serial-Converter-TU-S9/dp/B0007T27H8/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1372904367&sr=8-1&keywords=usb+serial)

2. Install drivers:

    [Download from Prolific](http://prolificusa.com/pl-2303hx-drivers/)

3. Install everything you need with homebrew. If you don't have homebrew just run `ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.github.com/Homebrew/homebrew/go/install)"`

First install python and pyserial with homebrew.

```bash
brew install python
echo "export PATH=/usr/local/bin:\$PATH" >> ~/.bash_profile
pip install pyserial
```

Next install r31jp.

```bash
brew tap nitsky/r31jp
brew install r31jp
```

Create an assembly file, and when you are ready to load it, just run

```bash
r31jp filename.asm
```

The `r31jp` script assembles the code with `as31` and then waits for you to reset the R31JP in MON mode. It then uploads the code, and opens a serial console using `screen`. You can run the code by switching the board into RUN mode and hitting reset, or by entering the command `G8000`. The script takes one argument, the path to an 8051 assembly file, and has two options, `-s` to specify the serial port for the R31JP, and `-b` to choose the baud rate of MINMON. The default serial port is `/dev/tty.usbserial` which the Prolific driver chooses for Mac OS X, and the default baud rate is 9600.

Please file an issue on GitHub if you run into any trouble!
